A new blog post about Pytrees for Scientific Python (#250)
scientific-python/blog.scientific-python.org: content/posts/optree/pytrees/index.md

---
title: "Pytrees for Scientific Python"
date: 2025-05-14T10:27:59-07:00
draft: false
description: "

> Introducing PyTrees for Scientific Python. We discuss what PyTrees are, how they're useful in the realm of scientific python, and how to work _efficiently_ with them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Introducing PyTrees for Scientific Python. We discuss what PyTrees are, how they're useful in the realm of scientific Python, and how to work _efficiently_ with them.
```

The core concept of PyTrees is being able to flatten them into a flat collection of leafs and a "blueprint" of the tree structure, and then being able to unflatten them back into the original PyTree.
This allows to apply generic transformations, e.g. taking the square root of each leaf of a PyTree with a `tree_map(np.sqrt, pytree)` operation:

```python
import optree as pt
import numpy as np

# tuple of a list of a dict with an array as value, and an array
pytree = ([[{"foo": np.array([4.0])}], np.array([9.0])],)

# sqrt of each leaf array
sqrt_pytree = pt.tree_map(np.sqrt, pytree)
print(f"{sqrt_pytree=}")
# >> sqrt_pytree=([[{'foo': array([2.])}], array([3.])],)

# reductions
all_positive = pt.tree_all(pt.tree_map(lambda x: x > 0.0, pytree))
print(f"{all_positive=}")
# >> all_positive=True

summed = pt.tree_reduce(sum, pytree)
print(f"{summed=}")
# >> summed=array([13.])
```

The trick here is that these operations can be implemented in three steps, e.g. `tree_map`:

```python
# step 1:
leafs, treedef = pt.tree_flatten(pytree)

# step 2:
new_leafs = tuple(map(fun, leafs))

# step 3:
result_pytree = pt.tree_unflatten(treedef, new_leafs)
```

> Here, we use [`optree`](https://github.com/metaopt/optree/tree/main/optree) - a standalone PyTree library - that enables all these manipulations. It focusses on performance, feature richness, minimal dependencies, and got adopted by [PyTorch](https://pytorch.org), [Keras](https://keras.io), and [TensorFlow](https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow) (through Keras) as a core dependency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we use [`optree`](https://github.com/metaopt/optree/tree/main/optree) &mdash; a standalone PyTree library &mdash; that enables all these manipulations. It focuses on performance, is feature rich, has minimal dependencies, and has been adopted by [PyTorch](https://pytorch.org), [Keras](https://keras.io), and [TensorFlow](https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow) (through Keras) as a core dependency.
```

* Use em dashes (&mdash;) instead of hyphens (-)
* Small typo fix: `focusses` -> `focuses`
* Possible rewording of sentence.

### PyTree Origins

Originally, the concept of PyTrees was developed by the [JAX](https://docs.jax.dev/en/latest/) project to make nested collections of JAX arrays work transparently at the "JIT-boundary" (the JAX JIT toolchain does not know about Python containers, only about JAX Arrays).

> However, PyTrees were quickly adopted by AI researchers for broader use-cases: semantically grouping layers of weights and biases in e.g. a list of named tuples (or dictionaries) is a common pattern in the JAX-AI-world, see the following (pseudo) Python snippet:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, PyTrees were quickly adopted by AI researchers for broader use-cases: semantically grouping layers of weights and biases in a list of named tuples (or dictionaries) is a common pattern in the JAX-AI-world, see the following (pseudo) Python snippet:
```

```python
from typing import NamedTuple, Callable
import jax
import jax.numpy as jnp

class Layer(NamedTuple):
    W: jax.Array
    b: jax.Array

layers = [
    Layer(W=jnp.array(...), b=jnp.array(...)),  # first layer
    Layer(W=jnp.array(...), b=jnp.array(...)),  # second layer
    ...,
]

@jax.jit
def neural_network(layers: list[Layer], x: jax.Array) -> jax.Array:
    for layer in layers:
        x = jnp.tanh(layer.W @ x + layer.b)
    return x

prediction = neural_network(layers=layers, x=jnp.array(...))
```

> Here, `layers` is a PyTree - a `list` of multiple `Layer` - and the JIT compiled `neural_network` function _just works_ with this datastructure as input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, `layers` is a PyTree &mdash; a `list` of multiple `Layer` &mdash; and the JIT compiled `neural_network` function _just works_ with this data structure as input.
```

* "data structure" should be two words.

### PyTrees in Scientific Python

Wouldn't it be nice to make workflows in the scientific Python ecosystem _just work_ with any PyTree?

Giving semantic meaning to numeric data through PyTrees can be useful for applications outside of AI as well.
Consider the following minimization of the [Rosenbrock](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosenbrock_function) function:

```python
from scipy.optimize import minimize

def rosenbrock(params: tuple[float]) -> float:
    """
    Rosenbrock function. Minimum: f(1, 1) = 0.

    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosenbrock_function
    """
    x, y = params
    return (1 - x) ** 2 + 100 * (y - x**2) ** 2

x0 = (0.9, 1.2)
res = minimize(rosenbrock, x0)
print(res.x)
# >> [0.99999569 0.99999137]
```

> Now, let's turn it a minimization that uses a more complex type for the parameters - a NamedTuple that describes our fit parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's consider a minimization that uses a more complex type for the parameters &mdash; a NamedTuple that describes our fit parameters:
```

I'm not sure what the best rephasing is here for an alternative to "turn it". Maybe "let's consider" or "let's use" or "let's see"? Maybe I'm missing the intent of the idea you have.

```python
import optree as pt
from typing import NamedTuple, Callable
from scipy.optimize import minimize as sp_minimize

class Params(NamedTuple):
    x: float
    y: float

def rosenbrock(params: Params) -> float:
    """
    Rosenbrock function. Minimum: f(1, 1) = 0.

    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosenbrock_function
    """
    return (1 - params.x) ** 2 + 100 * (params.y - params.x**2) ** 2

def minimize(fun: Callable, params: Params) -> Params:
    # flatten and store PyTree definition
    flat_params, treedef = pt.tree_flatten(params)

    # wrap fun to work with flat_params
    def wrapped_fun(flat_params):
        params = pt.tree_unflatten(treedef, flat_params)
        return fun(params)

    # actual minimization
    res = sp_minimize(wrapped_fun, flat_params)

    # re-wrap the bestfit values into Params with stored PyTree definition
    return pt.tree_unflatten(treedef, res.x)

# scipy minimize that works with any PyTree
x0 = Params(x=0.9, y=1.2)
bestfit_params = minimize(rosenbrock, x0)
print(bestfit_params)
# >> Params(x=np.float64(0.999995688776513), y=np.float64(0.9999913673387226))
```

> This new `minimize` function works with _any_ PyTree, let's consider a modified and more complex version of the Rosenbrock function that relies on two sets of `Params` as input - a common pattern for hierarchical models:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This new `minimize` function works with _any_ PyTree!

Let's now consider a modified and more complex version of the Rosenbrock function that relies on two sets of `Params` as input &mdash; a common pattern for hierarchical models:
```

Maybe break this into two complete thoughts?

```python
import numpy as np

def rosenbrock_modified(two_params: tuple[Params, Params]) -> float:
    """
    Modified Rosenbrock where the x and y parameters are determined by
    a non-linear transformations of two versions of each, i.e.:
      x = arcsin(min(x1, x2) / max(x1, x2))
      y = sigmoid(x1 - x2)
    """
    p1, p2 = two_params

    # calculate `x` and `y` from two sources:
    x = np.asin(min(p1.x, p2.x) / max(p1.x, p2.x))
    y = 1 / (1 + np.exp(-(p1.y / p2.y)))

    return (1 - x) ** 2 + 100 * (y - x**2) ** 2

x0 = (Params(x=0.9, y=1.2), Params(x=0.8, y=1.3))
bestfit_params = minimize(rosenbrock_modified, x0)
print(bestfit_params)
# >> (
#     Params(x=np.float64(4.686181110201706), y=np.float64(0.05129869722505759)),
#     Params(x=np.float64(3.9432263101976073), y=np.float64(0.005146110126174016)),
# )
```

The new `minimize` still works, because a `tuple` of `Params` is just _another_ PyTree!

### Final Thought

Working with nested data structures doesn’t have to be messy.
PyTrees let you focus on the data and the transformations you want to apply.

> Whether you're building neural networks, optimizing scientific models, or just deal with complex nested python containers, they make your code cleaner, more flexible, and just nicer to work with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whether you're building neural networks, optimizing scientific models, or just dealing with complex nested Python containers, PyTrees can make your code cleaner, more flexible, and just nicer to work with.
```

---
title: "Pytrees for Scientific Python"
date: 2025-05-14T10:27:59-07:00
draft: false
description: "
Introducing PyTrees for Scientific Python. We discuss what PyTrees are, how they're useful in the realm of scientific Python, and how to work _efficiently_ with them.
"
tags: ["PyTrees", "Functional Programming", "Tree-like data manipulation"]
displayInList: true
author: ["Peter Fackeldey", "Mihai Maruseac", "Matthew Feickert"]

> ---

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
summary: |
  Add summary here.
---
```

## Manipulating Tree-like Data using Functional Programming Paradigms

A "PyTree" is a nested collection of Python containers (e.g. dicts, (named) tuples, lists, ...), where the leafs are of interest.

> As you can imagine (or even experienced in the past), such arbitrary nested collections can be cumbersome to manipulate _efficiently_.

Author: Ah, I've not thought about using NetworkX for such cases. This could probably be a solution(?), but the difference here is that here we're not interested in the graph properties. We just want to access the leaves - no matter the structure of the tree - and manipulate / work with them. I would not know how to do this with NetworkX (but I'm also not very familiar with the library).
PyTrees are mainly about separating the leaves from a generic structure. The generic structure itself is not of interest.

> So, perhaps helpful to tell me what the types of issues are I might have run into, rather than expect me to know it already?

That's a good point! I'll try to rephrase this. 

From what I've seen in code snippets written by scientists, it's common to collect/track arrays/lists of numerical data in python containers (dicts, tuples, lists), e.g. if they measure multiple quantities in multiple experiment runs (this may become nested and complex fast).

> As you can imagine (or even experienced in the past), such arbitrary nested collections can be cumbersome to manipulate _efficiently_.

Reviewer 2: > Ah, I've not thought about using NetworkX for such cases. This could probably be a solution(?), but the difference here is that here we're not interested in the graph properties. We just want to access the leaves - no matter the structure of the tree - and manipulate / work with them. I would not know how to do this with NetworkX (but I'm also not very familiar with the library).

@dschult Can NetworkX grab leaf nodes and do operations on them? And if not, why not ;)

> As you can imagine (or even experienced in the past), such arbitrary nested collections can be cumbersome to manipulate _efficiently_.

Reviewer 3: To grab the nodes of a directed network in NetworkX use:
```[node for node, deg in G.out_degree if deg == 0]```

I think the tricky part for NetworkX would be handling unhashable objects. It might be possible to identify each container with an integer index to a list... It essentially flattens the PyTree while holding the relationships between containers in the networkx graph. From the list of tree containers along with a NetworkX graph, you could form a list of the leaf node indices as above, and then pass through the leaf level containers to manipulate the data inside each. If there are both values to be manipulated and containers in the same container it might be good to use two networkx graphs -- one with the container-container relationships and the other with container-value relationships. But I haven't thought much about how to identify containers vs values, etc.

> As you can imagine (or even experienced in the past), such arbitrary nested collections can be cumbersome to manipulate _efficiently_.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the explanation! I think that helps me understand even better why PyTrees can be useful.

Let's now consider a modified and more complex version of the Rosenbrock function that relies on two sets of `Params` as input &mdash; a common pattern for hierarchical models:

```python
import numpy as np

def rosenbrock_modified(two_params: tuple[Params, Params]) -> float:
    """
    Modified Rosenbrock where the x and y parameters are determined by
    a non-linear transformations of two versions of each, i.e.:
      x = arcsin(min(x1, x2) / max(x1, x2))
      y = sigmoid(x1 - x2)
    """
    p1, p2 = two_params

    # calculate `x` and `y` from two sources:
    x = np.asin(min(p1.x, p2.x) / max(p1.x, p2.x))
    y = 1 / (1 + np.exp(-(p1.y / p2.y)))

    return (1 - x) ** 2 + 100 * (y - x**2) ** 2

x0 = (Params(x=0.9, y=1.2), Params(x=0.8, y=1.3))
bestfit_params = minimize(rosenbrock_modified, x0)
print(bestfit_params)
# >> (
#     Params(x=np.float64(4.686181110201706), y=np.float64(0.05129869722505759)),
#     Params(x=np.float64(3.9432263101976073), y=np.float64(0.005146110126174016)),
# )
```

The new `minimize` still works, because a `tuple` of `Params` is just _another_ PyTree!

### Final Thought

Working with nested data structures doesn’t have to be messy.

> PyTrees let you focus on the data and the transformations you want to apply.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
PyTrees let you focus on the data and the transformations you want to apply, in a generic manner.
```

Just a very very tiny nit

draft: false
description: "
Introducing PyTrees for Scientific Python. We discuss what PyTrees are, how they're useful in the realm of scientific Python, and how to work _efficiently_ with them.
"
tags: ["PyTrees", "Functional Programming", "Tree-like data manipulation"]
displayInList: true
author: ["Peter Fackeldey", "Mihai Maruseac", "Matthew Feickert"]
summary: |
  This blog introduces PyTrees &mdash; nested Python data structures (such as lists, dicts, and tuples) with numerical leaf values &mdash; designed to simplify working with complex, hierarchically organized data.
  While such structures are often cumbersome to manipulate, PyTrees make them more manageable by allowing them to be flattened into a list of leaves along with a reusable structure blueprint in a _generic_ way.
  This enables flexible, generic operations like mapping and reducing from functional programming.
  By bringing those functional paradigms to structured data, PyTrees let you focus on what transformations to apply, not how to traverse the structure &mdash; no matter how deeply nested or complex it is.
---

## Manipulating Tree-like Data using Functional Programming Paradigms

> A "PyTree" is a nested collection of Python containers (e.g. dicts, (named) tuples, lists, ...), where the leafs are of interest.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A "PyTree" is a nested collection of Python containers (e.g. dicts, (named) tuples, lists, ...), where the leaves are of interest.
```

As you can imagine (or even experienced in the past), such arbitrary nested collections can be cumbersome to manipulate _efficiently_.
It often requires complex recursive logic which usually does not generalize to other nested Python containers (PyTrees).

> The core concept of PyTrees is being able to flatten them into a flat collection of leafs and a "blueprint" of the tree structure, and then being able to unflatten them back into the original PyTree.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The core concept of PyTrees is being able to flatten them into a flat collection of leaves and a "blueprint" of the tree structure, and then being able to unflatten them back into the original PyTree.
```

This allows for the application of generic transformations. For example, on a PyTree with NumPy arrays as leaves, taking the square root of each leaf with `tree_map(np.sqrt, pytree)`:

```python

> import optree as pt

Reviewer 6: FYI, optree 0.16.0 is released. I wonder if it is worth mentioning [`optree.pytree.reexeport(...)`](https://optree.readthedocs.io/en/latest/pytree.html#re-export-pytree-utilities-as-a-sub-module).

```python
>>> import optree
>>> pytree = optree.pytree.reexport(namespace='my-pkg', module='my_pkg.pytree')
>>> pytree.flatten({'a': 1, 'b': 2})
([1, 2], PyTreeSpec({'a': *, 'b': *}))
```

```python
# foo/__init__.py
import optree
pytree = optree.pytree.reexport(namespace='foo')

# foo/bar.py
from foo import pytree

@pytree.dataclasses.dataclass
class Bar:
    a: int
    b: float

print(pytree.flatten({'a': 1, 'b': 2, 'c': Bar(3, 4.0)}))
# Output:
#   ([1, 2, 3, 4.0], PyTreeSpec({'a': *, 'b': *, 'c': CustomTreeNode(Bar[()], [*, *])}, namespace='foo'))
```

Author: That's an awesome feature (which I'll certainly use for my libraries!). 
I think this blog post is more targeted towards users that may want to try `optree` directly, and less towards library developers that may want to reexport with additional functionality. That's why I'm leaning towards not adding it to the blog posts. Does that make sense to you @XuehaiPan ?

import numpy as np

# tuple of a list of a dict with an array as value, and an array
pytree = ([[{"foo": np.array([4.0])}], np.array([9.0])],)

# sqrt of each leaf array
sqrt_pytree = pt.tree_map(np.sqrt, pytree)
print(f"{sqrt_pytree=}")
# >> sqrt_pytree=([[{'foo': array([2.])}], array([3.])],)

# reductions

> all_positive = pt.tree_all(pt.tree_map(lambda x: x > 0.0, pytree))

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
all_positive = all(x > 0.0 for x in pt.tree_iter(pytree))
```

print(f"{all_positive=}")
# >> all_positive=True

summed = pt.tree_reduce(sum, pytree)
print(f"{summed=}")
# >> summed=array([13.])
```

The trick here is that these operations can be implemented in three steps, e.g. `tree_map`:

```python
# step 1:
leafs, treedef = pt.tree_flatten(pytree)

# step 2:
new_leafs = tuple(map(fun, leafs))

# step 3:
result_pytree = pt.tree_unflatten(treedef, new_leafs)
```

> Here, we use [`optree`](https://github.com/metaopt/optree/tree/main/optree) &mdash; a standalone PyTree library &mdash; that enables all these manipulations. It focuses on performance, is feature rich, has minimal dependencies, and has been adopted by [PyTorch](https://pytorch.org), [Keras](https://keras.io), and [TensorFlow](https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow) (through Keras) as a core dependency.

Author: I've mentioned `optree` earlier in https://github.com/scientific-python/blog.scientific-python.org/pull/250/commits/5e59e37aa89fbb693c38dd5b0249371ccdb83aac

print(bestfit_params)
# >> Params(x=np.float64(0.999995688776513), y=np.float64(0.9999913673387226))
```

This new `minimize` function works with _any_ PyTree!

Let's now consider a modified and more complex version of the Rosenbrock function that relies on two sets of `Params` as input &mdash; a common pattern for hierarchical models:

```python
import numpy as np

def rosenbrock_modified(two_params: tuple[Params, Params]) -> float:
    """
    Modified Rosenbrock where the x and y parameters are determined by
    a non-linear transformations of two versions of each, i.e.:
      x = arcsin(min(x1, x2) / max(x1, x2))
      y = sigmoid(x1 - x2)
    """
    p1, p2 = two_params

    # calculate `x` and `y` from two sources:
    x = np.asin(min(p1.x, p2.x) / max(p1.x, p2.x))
    y = 1 / (1 + np.exp(-(p1.y / p2.y)))

    return (1 - x) ** 2 + 100 * (y - x**2) ** 2

x0 = (Params(x=0.9, y=1.2), Params(x=0.8, y=1.3))
bestfit_params = minimize(rosenbrock_modified, x0)
print(bestfit_params)
# >> (
#     Params(x=np.float64(4.686181110201706), y=np.float64(0.05129869722505759)),
#     Params(x=np.float64(3.9432263101976073), y=np.float64(0.005146110126174016)),
# )
```

> The new `minimize` still works, because a `tuple` of `Params` is just _another_ PyTree!

Author: I think hierarchical models are something where this comes in very handy. It's not uncommon to fit a superposition of multiple functions (or pdfs, e.g. multiple gaussians) to data. Then it's nice to group those parameters semantically, instead of passing a flat list of floats / array of floats, where you have to remember what each value stands for. 

> What would we need to do to make that happen, and under which circumstances would that be useful?

I'm not suggesting _we_ should change APIs in scipy and co, it's rather that PyTrees (with tools like `optree`) enable to make APIs like `scipy.optimize.minimize` work generically with any data structure (not just a flat list/array of floats) without too much code changes. It's something that users can opt-in to make their code more expressive as they're the ones that define the "model", here the `rosenbrock_modified` function.

Does that make sense? (Do you have a proposal to write this more clearly here?)

The core concept of PyTrees is being able to flatten them into a flat collection of leaves and a "blueprint" of the tree structure, and then being able to unflatten them back into the original PyTree.
This allows for the application of generic transformations.
In this blog post, we use [`optree`](https://github.com/metaopt/optree/tree/main/optree) &mdash; a standalone PyTree library &mdash; that enables these transformations. It focuses on performance, is feature rich, has minimal dependencies, and has been adopted by [PyTorch](https://pytorch.org), [Keras](https://keras.io), and [TensorFlow](https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow) (through Keras) as a core dependency.
For example, on a PyTree with NumPy arrays as leaves, taking the square root of each leaf with `optree.tree_map(np.sqrt, tree)`:

```python
import optree as pt
import numpy as np

# tuple of a list of a dict with an array as value, and an array
tree = ([[{"foo": np.array([4.0])}], np.array([9.0])],)

# sqrt of each leaf array
sqrt_tree = pt.tree_map(np.sqrt, tree)
print(f"{sqrt_tree=}")
# >> sqrt_tree=([[{'foo': array([2.])}], array([3.])],)

# reductions

> all_positive = all(x > 0.0 for x in pt.tree_iter(tree))

Reviewer 2: Or perhaps the result should be an array of `N` values: one for each leaf array.

> all_positive = all(x > 0.0 for x in pt.tree_iter(tree))

Author: good point! (updated in https://github.com/scientific-python/blog.scientific-python.org/pull/250/commits/b5acc95b0f6ccd42a6e5cb2c06a5d1f70068b809)

print(f"{all_positive=}")
# >> all_positive=True

summed = pt.tree_reduce(sum, tree)
print(f"{summed=}")

> # >> summed=array([13.])

Author: good point! (updated in https://github.com/scientific-python/blog.scientific-python.org/pull/250/commits/b5acc95b0f6ccd42a6e5cb2c06a5d1f70068b809)

```

The trick here is that these operations can be implemented in three steps, e.g. `tree_map`:

```python
# step 1:

> leafs, treedef = pt.tree_flatten(tree)

Author: Good catch, thanks! 🙏

# step 2:
new_leaves = tuple(map(fun, leaves))

# step 3:
result_tree = pt.tree_unflatten(treedef, new_leaves)
```

### PyTree Origins

Originally, the concept of PyTrees was developed by the [JAX](https://docs.jax.dev/en/latest/) project to make nested collections of JAX arrays work transparently at the "JIT-boundary" (the JAX JIT toolchain does not know about Python containers, only about JAX Arrays).
However, PyTrees were quickly adopted by AI researchers for broader use-cases: semantically grouping layers of weights and biases in a list of named tuples (or dictionaries) is a common pattern in the JAX-AI-world, see the following (pseudo) Python snippet:

```python
from typing import NamedTuple, Callable
import jax
import jax.numpy as jnp

class Layer(NamedTuple):
    W: jax.Array
    b: jax.Array

layers = [
    Layer(W=jnp.array(...), b=jnp.array(...)),  # first layer
    Layer(W=jnp.array(...), b=jnp.array(...)),  # second layer
    ...,
]

@jax.jit
def neural_network(layers: list[Layer], x: jax.Array) -> jax.Array:
    for layer in layers:
        x = jnp.tanh(layer.W @ x + layer.b)
    return x

prediction = neural_network(layers=layers, x=jnp.array(...))
```

> Here, `layers` is a PyTree &mdash; a `list` of multiple `Layer` &mdash; and the JIT compiled `neural_network` function _just works_ with this data structure as input.

Author: It's a ('3-level') nested datastructure in the sense: `layers` is a list (1st level) of `Layer`s (2nd level) of `W` (3rd level [leaf]) and `b` (3rd level [leaf]). Here, one could also create a list for weights and one for biases and make a `zip`-loop over both, but then weights and biases are not logically grouped anymore in a `Layer` object.

---
title: "Pytrees for Scientific Python"

> date: 2025-05-14T10:27:59-07:00

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2025-07-08
```
